What is "Zen" Tarot?

Traditionally, tarot has been used to try and predict the future – what will happen with our relationships, money, health, career, or any of the dozens of other life issues that we face every day. Zen, however, focuses on the here and now. 

Where does the future come from, after all? It is born out of the seeds that we plant today. So the more intelligent and aware we can be in the present, the greater likelihood that the next moment will unfold just exactly as it should. The OSHO Zen Tarot is designed to help us to take a moment and turn our attention away from outside preoccupations, and to get in touch with our inner intuition and knowing. It is the voice of this intuition and knowing that unfailingly guides us in the right direction, and the OSHO Zen Tarot simply helps us to listen to it.


OSHO Zen Tarot

Tarot has been in existence for thousands of years, since the times of ancient Egypt or perhaps even before. The first known use of the tarot in the West was in the Middle Ages. During those turbulent times, the imagery of the tarot was used as a code for transmitting the teachings of the medieval mystery schools. Over time, tarot has been used in many ways – as a tool for predicting the future, as a lighthearted "parlor game," a way to gather unseen, "occult" information about various situations, etcetera. Some say that the number of cards is based on the number of steps taken by the infant Siddhartha – later to become Gautama the Buddha – as soon as he was born. He walked seven steps forward and seven steps backward in each of the four cardinal directions, says the legend, and this became the model for the "minor" cards in the tarot.

In addition to these 56 cards of the Minor Arcana, the tarot contains an additional 22 cards, the Major Arcana, which tell the complete story of the human spiritual journey. From the first innocent step of The Fool, to the culmination of the journey represented by the card of Completion, we find in the Major Arcana the archetypal images that connect us all as human beings. They tell of a journey of self-discovery that is absolutely unique to each individual, while the core truths to be discovered are the same regardless of race, gender, class or religious upbringing. 

In the traditional tarot deck this journey of self-discovery was perceived as a kind of spiral, with each Completion leading to a new level on the path, a new beginning with the re-entry of The Fool. In this deck, however, the Master card has been added. This card allows us to leave the spiral behind, to take a jump off the wheel of death and rebirth. The Master card symbolizes the ultimate transcendence of journeying itself, a transcendence that becomes possible only through the dissolving of the separate, individual ego in enlightenment.

The OSHO Zen Tarot is definitely not a traditional tarot in the sense that you play with prediction. Rather it is a transcendental game of Zen which mirrors the moment, unwaveringly presenting what is here, now, without judgment or comparison. This game is a wake-up call to tune in to sensitivity, intuition, compassion, receptivity, courage and individuality. This focus on awareness is one of the many innovations to the old systems and thinking of the tarot that will soon become obvious to experienced users as they begin to work with the OSHO Zen Tarot. 

The Major Arcana
These 22 cards are numbered with roman numerals from 0 to XXI in this deck and represent the central, archetypal themes of the human spiritual journey. The Master card, symbolizing transcendence, has no number. When a Major Arcana card appears in a reading, it has special significance above and beyond the cards of the Minor Arcana. It tells us that our current circumstances are giving us an opportunity to examine one of the central themes of our own individual spiritual journey. It will be particularly helpful to examine other cards in reference to this central theme – for example, "What does the fact that I've been working too hard (Exhaustion) tell me about my need for self-expression (Creativity)? How am I thwarting my progress in the journey towards creativity by putting all my energy into keeping the 'machine' going?" If there are no Major Arcana cards in the reading, chances are the current situation is a transient sub-plot of the larger play of your life. This doesn't mean that it is unimportant, or that you should feel foolish to be so strongly affected by it, but the very absence of Major Arcana cards can reassure you that "this too will pass" and later on you might very well wonder what all the fuss was about. Finally, if there are Major Arcana cards in a reading it can indicate that a major change of scenes and characters in the play is taking place. There are times, in fact, when the profusion of Major Arcana cards is so overwhelming that you might want to choose just one of them – the one that strikes you with the clearest message – as the centerpiece of a new reading to help you understand what you are facing now.

The Minor Arcana
These 56 cards are divided into four suits representing the four elements, each marked with a particular color-coded diamond to distinguish them, and of the predominant color of the suit. The cards of the Water suit have a blue diamond, those of Fire, red, Clouds have a gray diamond, and Rainbows, a rainbow-colored diamond. As in a regular deck of playing cards, the suits of the tarot each contain "court cards" which have here been stripped of the importance of their aristocratic feudal titles and given names to simply represent the different opportunities for mastery over the four elements that they occupy.

The suit of Fire corresponds to the Wands of the traditional tarot, and represents the realm of action and response, the energy that moves us into situations and out of them again when we follow our "gut feelings" rather than our minds or our emotions.

The Water suit replaces the traditional Cups, representing the emotional side of life, and tends to be a more "feminine" and receptive energy than Fire, which is more "masculine" and outgoing. 

Clouds have been chosen to replace Swords, traditionally the suit of air, representing the mind. This is because the nature of the unenlightened mind is precisely cloud–like in the way it blocks light and darkens the landscape around us, preventing us from seeing things as they really are. But there is another aspect to clouds that must not be overlooked – they come and go, and are therefore not to be taken too seriously! 

Finally, the suit of Rainbows in this deck takes the place of the traditional suit of Disks, or Pentacles, representing the earth element. This is traditionally the element representing the practical, material side of life. But in keeping with the attitude of Zen, that even the most humble, earthy activities contain an opportunity to celebrate the sacred, the Rainbow has been chosen for this suit. In using the Rainbow – which bridges the earth and sky, matter and spirit – we remind ourselves that in reality there is no separation between the lower and the higher, that indeed it is a continuum of one total energy. And that heaven is not some remote place high in the sky, but a reality waiting to be discovered right here on earth. 

So here is a journey of discovery, and the way to the ultimate transcendence of it all. Go lightly and playfully, from the peaks to the valleys and back to the peaks again, savoring every step of the way. Learn from your mistakes and you can't go wrong.
